[SAREL GRONUM] Innovation surrounds us, and we depend on
it in all aspects of our lives.
As I’m speaking to you now, you are looking, listening and interacting with it, sitting
on it and ... hopefully wearing it.
So we mostly recognize the tangible products of innovation and do not realize that there
is much more to innovation than just new products and services.
It is important that you can correctly identify the full spectrum of innovation types before
building your skills on how to manage your business’ innovation processes and pipeline.
There are a number of innovation typologies that look at different dimensions of innovation.
One of the oldest innovation typologies, which has stood the test of time, was identified
by Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter.
According to Schumpeter, Innovation manifests as “gales of creative destruction” and
offers “the carrot of spectacular reward or the stick of destitution” that drives
economic development.
That is to say, innovation offers genuine monopoly gains for successful innovators and
destruction to those that do not adapt or innovate.
In 1911 Schumpeter identified five different types of innovation.
The first type of innovation is the introduction of new products or services.
Australian examples include the 1993 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation’s
Wi-Fi technology; Professor Graeme Clark’s 1978 cochlear implant or bionic ear; and the
Rasmussen brothers, Lars and Jens’ 2001 platform development that was used for creating
Google Maps.
The second is the introduction of new methods of production.
An example is the cane chopper harvester invented by Ken Gaunt in 1958 that mechanised sugarcane
harvesting.
Third is the opening of new markets.
Examples are technology firms that enter traditional markets and subsequently open new markets
like Tesla in the motor industry.
Tesla made electric vehicles cool by targeting high-end sports car customers instead of the
lower-end, as other manufacturers did.
Fourth, firms innovate by developing new sources of supply as is the case today with the dramatic
increase in renewable energy and energy storage technologies.
Globalisation and associated geographic shifts in production facilities to lower wage economies
is another example of supply source innovation.
Last, firms can innovate by changing the structure of an industry by creating or breaking up
existing monopoly positions.
This is also referred to as business model innovation and disruptive innovation.
The music industry is a good example where streaming services like Spotify are replacing
online digital music sales.
Imagine also how the electric driverless car will completely change the structure and organization
of the motor industry as well as the entire value chain that includes finance, insurance
and fuel supply to name but a few.
Schumpeter's first four types of innovation are still used today as the basis of tests
and surveys conducted to identify the prevalence of business innovation within an economy.
One such survey is the Australian Bureau of Statistics’ national innovation survey,
which divides the innovation types into categories that loosely align with Schumpeter’s forms
of innovation.
This survey establishes the percentage of businesses indicating that they have implemented
a particular type of innovation in the preceding year.
This data clearly shows that innovation is not just about new products and services.
Australian businesses innovate across a broad range of innovation types, with large businesses
in particular, implementing more process and marketing innovations than product or service
innovations.
Although not measured here, innovations that change the structure of an industry, Schumpeter’s
5th innovation type, are the exception rather than the rule.
What is also evident from these statistics is that different types of innovations within
a firm do not take place in isolation, they normally require innovations in other areas
of the business model.
Henry Ford did not revolutionize the motor industry solely by introducing the Model T
as a product innovation.
Rather he created a new industry for affordable passenger cars by innovating across a number
of business model elements.
He introduced mass production by implementing a moving assembly line innovation, adopted
from clockmakers, gunmakers, and meat processors.
Ford Motors also innovated their human resource management practices and marketing strategies.
In doing so, Ford Motors increased their production from 35 000 cars in 1911 to 300 000 cars four
years later.
To place this into perspective, Ford Motors was producing 100,000 more cars than the combined
output of the total motor industry at that time.
Companies that only focus on product or service innovation are unable to create sustainable
growth.
Instead, they also need to funnel resources to develop other innovations that are required
for successful commercialization of their product or service innovations, like Henry
Ford did.
This is confirmed in research by Damanpour and others, who found combinative effects
of innovation types on firm performance.
Firms that adopted novel combinations of different innovation types, away from industry norms,
outperformed their industry rivals.
My own research also confirms that introducing a combination of innovation types, measured
as innovation breadth or diversity, has a positive impact on firm performance.
Firms are, therefore, encouraged to implement new product and service innovations in conjunction
with production process, management and marketing innovations to ensure sustainable growth and
performance.
There is more to innovation than just new products and services.
Firms are encouraged to recognise all innovation types and to invest in capabilities to exploit
the full spectrum.