[SAREL GRONUM] Ever wondered how it is possible for well-managed,
successful businesses who dominated their industries, like Nokia and Kodak, to be toppled
by new entrants to the market?
Or why vehicle manufacturers like Daimler Benz are viewing software companies like Google,
not other car manufacturers, as their main future competitors?
It is because driverless vehicle technologies are changing the rules of the game for the
motor industry.
According to PwC surveys, 75% of chief executives said that technological advancements will
significantly change or completely reshape competition within the next five years.
To explain this phenomenon, Clay Christiansen developed the theory of disruption and coined
the term “disruptive innovation” to refer to a process that is similar to Schumpeter’s
gales of creative destruction.
Since then, disruptive innovation has become a buzz phrase which is often wrongly interpreted,
as is the case with Uber in the taxi industry.
It is therefore important to clarify how the disruptive innovation process works.
It is a process where a company, usually small with fewer resources, is able to successfully
challenge established incumbent businesses as was the case with Amazon and Netflix.
Christensen identified 2 forms of disruptive innovation: low-end and new-market disruptive
innovation.
The low-end disruptive innovation process is described as follows:
Dominant businesses, usually focus on sustaining innovation aimed at increasing the perceived
value of existing products for their most demanding and profitable customer segments.
In doing so they often overshoot the performance requirements of the mass-market and ignore
low-end users.
New disruptive entrants establish a foothold in the market by targeting low-end, less profitable
users in providing them with a “good enough” product.
The products are initially perceived by the mass market to be inferior to the incumbent’s
products.
However, disruptors improve product performance over time.
When the entrant’s innovation reaches a performance level that meets the needs of
the mass market it is adopted by the more profitable upper segments of the market and
thus disrupt the incumbent.
In contrast, new-market disruption occurs when a disruptor creates or capitalises on
a new market that did not exist before.
To illustrate new-market disruption, let’s look at Intel processors.
Intel has dominated the microprocessor market for desktops, notebooks and servers from the
1980’s by continually improving their microprocessors.
With their “Intel Inside” slogan they seemed unstoppable.
They continually increased the memory and processing speeds of their processors to accommodate
more sophisticated applications, referred to as sustaining innovation.
However, in the early 1990’s Intel made several mistakes that jeopardised their dominance
in the market.
While Intel was incrementally improving their processors for use in computers, a small British
company, called ARM Holdings, partnered with Apple in 1992 to develop a processor for the
Apple Newton personal digital assistant.
The personal digital assistant represented an early technology in what would with time
become the mobile device market.
In contrast, Intel declined the opportunity to develop a microchip for the Apple iPhone.
Instead they continued to focus their efforts on developing technology for the mainstream
computer market, which had vastly different requirements to mobile devices.
Intel's power hungry processors were unsuitable for mobile devices which require low cost
processors that minimise power consumption and heat dissipation.
Thus, when the market shifted away from personal computers to mobile devices, ARM was well
positioned to capitalize on this shift.
After securing a foothold in the new mobile device market, ARM gradually improved the
functionality of their processors.
So much so that today ARM-based processors are likely to break Intel's virtual monopoly
in the highly-profitable high-end market for processors used in data centres and cloud
servers.
ARM therefore moved from a new market space, serving non-users of existing technologies,
into the established market to disrupt the incumbent, Intel.
In both low-end and new-market disruptions, incumbents are said to be incapable to react
because they are unable to adapt to the disruptive innovator’s business model innovation that
is changing the rules of the game.
Not only did ARM innovate their technology, they also adopted a completely different business
model and as a result innovated by changing the dominant logic of how business is done
in the industry.
Instead of self-manufacturing processors like their competitors, ARM developed the processor
technology which it then licensed to other companies to use as the foundation of the
products they were manufacturing.
By adopting a business model based on licensing Intellectual Property, ARM was able to focus
its resources into building innovation capability instead of production facilities.
Before the launch of the iPhone, Intel also underestimated smartphone growth that was
a 100 times higher than anyone thought at the time.
The profit margin for mobile devices was substantially lower than Intel’s lucrative established
market.
Rather than diverting resources to develop microprocessors for this new market, Intel
continued to focus their attention to develop better performing chips for their mass and
higher-end customers.
Incumbents are therefore normally unwilling to foster new innovations that may cannibalise
their existing investments.
They therefore focus on short to medium term financial goals instead of building capacity
that would allow them to play in future markets.
Today ARM dominates the smartphone and tablet processor markets.
ARM’s processor architecture allows them to deliver low-cost processors built to perform
specific functions.
These are perfectly suited to the fast growing smart-device markets for vehicles, communication
and home applications.
Intel may be a classic example of the Icarus paradox; their successful original business
model became a liability, similar to Compaq, Xerox and Kodak.
Intel is however slowly catching up and has taken a long time to adapt their business
model in line with the new dominant logic of the industry; to produce and sell lots
of inexpensive chips for specific applications.
The Business Innovation literature is making valuable contributions to the theory of disruptive
innovation because the fundamental challenge of disruptive technologies is a business model
problem, not a technology problem.
To disrupt or defend against disruption depends on your ability to innovate and pivot your
business model.