[SAREL GRONUM] All innovations are not created equal.
This does not mean that one type of innovation is more important than another, but rather
that innovation types have varying degrees of potential impact on the firm, market and
economy.
Newness is intrinsic to the definition of innovation.
Therefore some innovation typologies use novelty or the degree of familiarity to existing knowledge,
resources and practices to distinguish between different types of innovation.
The degree of novelty also depends on the level of analyses that are applied.
While a new process innovation like an automated warehousing system may be new for a firm,
it is not necessarily new at the industry level where it may already have been applied
by other firms.
The level of impact or the perceived extent of the change caused by an innovation within
the market or industry is also an important strategic consideration.
While some innovations only impact the focal firm’s performance, others have the ability
to create much broader impact, by changing the competitive landscape or even the structure
of the broader economy.
Tidd, Bessant and Pavitt’s classification of innovation applied these dimensions and
identified three types of innovation incremental, radical and transformational.
First, at lower levels of potential impact, incremental innovation represents continued
improvement, refinement, modification and extension of existing products, services and
processes.
Examples are Gillette who continually develops new derivatives of their shaving products,
banks that introduce cardless cash withdrawal to automatic teller machine services, or Nissan
who continually improves their production automation.
Continuous incremental innovation sustains competitiveness through its cumulative positive
impact on sales growth and production efficiency.
It is therefore no surprise that incremental innovations are the most common form of innovation
and most likely originate from market pull forces caused by changing customer needs.
The second type, Radical Innovations are discontinuous events that introduces an entirely new core
technology, which significantly alters the consumption patterns in a market.
Radical innovations provide superior benefits to that offered by existing solutions.
Recent examples include the use of drone technologies in military applications, Salesforce’s customer
relationship management service which provides business customers with the ability to gather
and track interactions with their customers, streamline processes, and improve profitability.
And Toyota’s Just-In-Time operations system which revolutionized logistics management
by integrating suppliers with the production process, eliminating stock requirements and
wastage.
Although incremental innovations are important for sustaining competitiveness, evidence suggests
that radical innovators grow faster than other firms by dominating competitors or creating
new markets that did not exist before.
Radical innovations are much rarer than incremental innovations because they require technology
push or the development of breakthrough technologies or novel combinations of existing technologies.
While radical innovations represents king tide wave changes to the competitive landscape
of an industry, the third innovation type, transformational innovations are tsunamis
that have the ability to change techno-economic paradigms.
Transformational innovations are technological revolutions that affects structural changes
in the entire economy.
Imagine for example how technologies like the self-driving electric vehicle, cloud computing
and advanced artificial intelligence would impact virtually every sector of the economy.
In addition to these three impact and novelty dimension classifications, other popular innovation
types include modular, architectural and platform innovation types.
A distinction is also made between competence-enhancing and competence-destroying radical innovations.
Modular or component innovation is when you change an element of a product without changing
its configuration.
Early versions of electric vehicles are a good example in that the petrol engine was
replaced by an electric motor without major changes to the configuration of the vehicle’s
architecture.
This is the most prevalent type of incremental innovation.
Tushman and Anderson distinguish between competence-enhancing and competence-destroying radical innovations.
Competence-enhancing radical innovations represent massive improvements to older technologies,
which build on the existing know-how that does not render the skills required to master
the old technology obsolete.
The migration form desktop computers to mobile computing devices is an example.
Competence-destroying radical innovations are based on fundamentally different skills
and knowledge that applied to the old technology, as was the case when steam locomotives were
replaced by diesel locomotives.
Competence-destroying innovations are normally introduced by firms from outside the industry
whereas existing firms focus more on incremental and competence-enhancing innovations.
Firms can also extend their product portfolio by combining existing technologies to create
new products or services.
This is referred to as architectural or design innovation as it changes the architecture
of a product or the way components are linked together without changing its components and
normally serve new markets or applications.
Apple’s iPhone and iPad can be considered as examples of architectural innovations.
Architectural innovations should not be confused with platform innovations that represents
innovations used across a number of different products or services with minimal adjustments
required.
Firms use platforms to leverage the benefits of their investments in generating innovations.
Examples of platform technologies at the firm level includes Volkswagen’s use of one body
manufacturing line to produce several vehicle models or Bosch’s use of a single standardised
electric motor in a number of their hand-tool ranges.
Gaining broad industry adoption of your technology platform is a major growth driver for firms
today.
It is therefore no surprise that the search for market platform innovations are high on
the agenda for developers at Google’s “moonshot factory” called “X”.
As such they developed Google Glass in the hope that it would become a radical innovation
within the rapidly growing, wearable technology market.
Google Glass failed to generate significant consumer adoption, causing them to relaunch
the product as the “Glass Enterprise Edition”.
This new product edition represents a wearable platform product that targets businesses which
use it in various processes and production applications, ranging from jet engines to
precision surgery.
The value of platform innovations are their ability to generate network effects.
Network effects imply that user value increases with adoption by every additional user.
For example, the more business that use the Glass Enterprise Edition, the more software
developers would be enticed to write new applications specific for use on this platform which enhances
platform user value.
Platforms also provide access to additional revenue streams within the multi-sided markets
they create.
To illustrate, in addition to hardware sales the Glass Enterprise Edition allows Google
to also make money from App sales.
Not all innovations are created equal because the extent of their potential impact varies.
Knowledge of the different innovation types represents options for further exploration.
Winning firms build healthy balanced innovation portfolios across the dimensions of the innovation
space.