[GERALD MARION] They actually are able to keep us connected and engaged.
The more connected and engaged we are, the more we buy their things.
The more we buy their solutions.
The more we find it convenient.
And so if you focus on the return on experience then the product innovation of the service
innovation has to play a role in reinforcing the ultimate experience.
So product innovation is important, but products can be commoditized very quickly.
It's very hard to have a product innovation competitive edge for more than six months
to even less, increasingly.
So unless you have a continuous cycle of product innovation (but then they copy it) but that
doesn't make you that would probably make you at parity with your competitors.
We think service innovation can differentiate, but the problem then is service innovation
requires you to be continuously managing every touch point at the same level of quality.
What we think is if you try to dominate or if you seek to dominate the experience it
doesn't matter who's got a product.
You can actually own the client and partner with those who will help you deliver a variety
of experience of the right service but actually own the end-to-end customer experience and
at that level you are basically could be a lower cost to serve business or you could
increase your margin but you earn a customer.
The example is Borders, which disappeared and filed for bankruptcy, great experience
around books, but when all the sales of books were declining they thought - let's offer
coffees.
But it was, it never took off.
It was masking the continuous decline of Borders until they were bankrupt.
But think of Amazon, who was selling books and then launched the Kindle, and created
the Kindle moment and what we did is we augmented the experience of many readers by removing
the gate keepers of value such as the publisher.
They actually expanded the experience beyond the physicality of a book.
So you're reading but you've gone even further.
So what we're seeing is we focus on the experience as a dominant trait and competitive edge and
doesn't worry about who owns the product are actually leading and disrupting businesses
faster.
And so we would say that all products, services, experience are all important, but we think
the competitive edge is coming from focusing on the experience and getting that experience
right and the products can come from anyone.