[SAREL GRONUM] Firms that only focus on product and service
innovations are exposed to competitors that have a broader perspective on value creation.
The Kellogg School of Management developed the Innovation Radar tool to help firms obtain
a 360 degree view of all possible business innovation options.
This tool was based on the results of a study on the innovation practices of leading Fortune
500 companies.
The innovation radar illustrates how well a firm innovates relative to other firms in
their industry across 12 dimensions.
These 12 dimensions can be divided into four quadrants that investigate key innovation
activities associated with WHAT value the firm delivers to WHOM, HOW and WHERE.
Interestingly, these four quadrants are also captured in Teece’s description of the business
model as an “architecture for how a firm creates and delivers value to customers and
the mechanisms employed to capture a share of that value”.
Applying the innovation radar directs management's attention to explore multiple options for
redesigning their business models across the full spectrum of business model elements.
Except for cost structure, the other eight business model elements are incorporated as
part of the 12 innovation dimensions comprising the Innovation Radar.
The first quadrant, the WHAT, covers the creation of new value propositions.
It includes potential platform innovations that exploit communalities to deliver derivative
products or services faster and more efficiently.
It also measures a firm’s inclination to develop new integrated end-to-end consumer
solutions aimed at solving specific customer problems.
The second quadrant, the WHO, identifies new customer segments or uncovering new market
niches with unmet needs.
This also represents opportunities to develop novel customer experiences and relationships.
The firm can also endeavour to innovate their revenue model to tap into new revenue streams
or develop novel pricing strategies to expand value capture.
The third quadrant, the HOW, refers to new ways of organising the firm structure and
operational activities required to deliver value.
New ways of organising key activities and partnerships as well as changing the supply
chain or supply sources are all included within this quadrant.
The last quadrant, the WHERE, looks at the channels of distribution that a firm can use
to create new points of presence in the market.
How you build networks of channel partners and leverage your brand is of special concern
in this quadrant.
The Innovation Radar is a powerful diagnostic tool for firms to visually map their innovation
performance.
This is done by quantifying how well they perform on each of the 12 innovation dimensions
relative to their major competitors.
In this particular example we are using a scale of 0-100.
You can use a combination of objective and subjective metrics, which are all context
dependent.
Some of the metrics that can be used to determine the level of innovation performance for each
dimension are…
You can count the number of successfully implemented innovations.
You can determine the relative market impact of successfully implemented innovations.
You can measure resource commitments made and the readiness levels of innovations under
development.
You can also use subjective senior management consensus or consumer perception survey data
as measures.
The best approach is to use some combination of these measures as a composite index to
plot your performance on the innovation radar as in this example.
Radical and transformational innovations are associated with higher scores on the dimensions.
Radical innovations are the exception rather than the rule with most firms not achieving
this level of impact.
Management now have a clear picture of how well they are performing on each of the innovation
dimensions and can determine if their actual innovation performance is in line with their
corporate strategies.
This example shows that the focal firm has strengths in brand, market presence and platform
related innovations.
The firm is less innovative in their supply chain, organisational and customer segment
dimensions.
None of their innovation dimensions can be described as representing radical innovations.
Once you have determined your firm’s innovation profile, you should also explore the innovation
profiles of your major competitors to uncover innovation trends in your industry.
Analysing competitor profiles provides insights into relative strengths and weaknesses as
well as opportunities for innovation that have been overlooked.
From the example it seems that most industry firms are seeking opportunities in the same
places and therefore tend to come up with the same innovations.
It is therefore indicative of industry conversion with competitors copying one another’s innovation
strategies.
However, Firm C, represented by the blue line, seems to have broken the mould by choosing
to excel at building key new marketing networks.
This shift away from the industry norm can potentially change the basis of competition
within the industry.
Because each dimension requires a different set of capabilities that is difficult to develop
or acquire overnight, such a shift away from the industry norm could leave competitors
at a distinct disadvantage.
Another opportunity that is overlooked by all firms in this example is to build new
customer segments or to uncover unserved market niches.
As stated before, innovations hardly happens in isolation.
To find and develop new market segments, would most likely also require concurrent innovation
along the value proposition and solution innovation dimensions.
So to be a game changer, you have to differentiate your firm’s innovation efforts from the
dominant industry innovation patterns.
Before you put effort into pursuing a new innovation direction, it is important to make
sure that it is a dimension that will be valued by the customers, however this is often difficult
to do.
One of the main reasons why this is so challenging is because there are few precedents available
to validate your firm's assumptions.
Essentially you are sailing uncharted waters - at this point design thinking and lean startup
methodologies can help you navigate the process.
Make sure that you do not overextend yourself in trying to be an exceptional innovator on
all dimensions.
Neither should you dilute value by doing a little on all.
Rather ensure that you focus on those innovation areas that are in line with your corporate
strategy.
To be a game changer you have to be a purple cow in the Friesian cow paddock.
You have to innovate on dimensions that are important for your customers and unique to
the industry norm.